                                                                                   Application Note 75

 www.seabird.com | +1 425-643-9866



               Maintaining SBE 5T, 5P, and 5M Submersible Pumps
This application covers all SBE 5 pumps:
• SBE 5T titanium housing (depth to 10,500 meters).
• SBE 5P plastic housing (depth to 600 meters).
• SBE 5M miniature, available in titanium housing (depth to 10,500 meters) or plastic housing (depth to 600
    meters).
                                                        Caution
   Do not run the pump dry. The pump is water lubricated; running it without water will damage it. If testing your
system in dry conditions, remove the Tygon tubing from the hose barb at the top of the pump head, and fill the inside
     of the pump head with water. This will provide enough lubrication to prevent pump damage during testing.

A properly maintained pump will provide constant flow for your CTD and any pumped auxiliary sensors, resulting in
high quality data. The main symptom of a non-functioning or poorly functioning pump is bad conductivity data,
because the pump is not pulling water through the conductivity cell.



                                                      Note: White pump head was replaced with black pump head for SBE 5M,
     Hose              Pump
                                                      5P, and 5T in November 2015; dimensions and functionality are identical.
     barb              head                                        SBE
                                                                    5P

                          Hose
                          barb



     SBE               End cap
      5T               retaining
                       ring
      SBE 5T (old design,
                       (5T old
      discontinued 2011)
                       design
                       only)


 Bulkhead
                                                                                                            SBE 5M with
 connector
                                                                                                 plastic (left) and titanium (right)
                                                                                                               housing
                                               SBE 5T           SBE 5P
                                           (current design)



Routine Rinsing after Recovery (applies to all pumps)
At the end of a day of taking casts:

1.    Remove the Tygon tubing from the pump head’s hose barbs.

2.    Leaving the pump head on the housing, thoroughly rinse the inside of the pump head, pouring clean, fresh water
      through a hose barb. If the pump head is not rinsed between uses, salt crystals may form on the impeller. Over
      time, this may freeze the impeller in place, preventing the pump from working.

3.    Replace the Tygon tubing on the hose barbs.


AN75 Revised 3/2024
4.    Unscrew the lock collar from the bulkhead connector and slide it up the cable.                         Locking sleeve
      Thoroughly rinse the cable connection (still mated) with clean, fresh water. This
      will prevent premature cable failure.

5.    Slide the lock collar back into place, and screw it hand-tight back onto the
      bulkhead connector.

Maintain SBE 5T, 5P, and 5M Pumps
                                                       Caution
     Use only Super O-Lube, which is silicon-based. Do not use Parker O-Lube, which is petroleum based.

                                                        Caution
Be careful not to pinch the O-rings, which will allow water to enter the housing and damage the electronics.

Note: Colors may vary from what is shown in the photos. White impeller was replaced with black impeller in 2011;
white pump head was replaced with black pump head in 2015. White and black versions of these parts are
interchangeable.

Periodic Cleaning                                                                           End cap
                                                                                            O-rings
If you are going to store the pump for more than 1 week, or have removed the
pump from a mooring, perform a more thorough cleaning:

                                    Caution
   Remove the end cap and impeller from the housing before cleaning the
 impeller. The end cap O-rings seal the electronics chamber. The end cap may
 “walk” out of the housing after the pump head is removed, allowing water to
     enter the electronics chamber if you clean the impeller without first
                    removing the end cap from the housing.                                End cap                   Pump
                                                                                        and impeller                head

1.    Unscrew the pump head from the housing.

2.    Pull out the end cap from the housing.

3.    Using clean, fresh water, thoroughly rinse the pump head and impeller.

4.    Inspect the impeller for salt deposits. Clean any deposits with clean, fresh water and a toothbrush. Verify that the
      impeller can turn freely.

5.    Inspect the shaft, and the O-ring and thrust washer holding the impeller on the shaft. There is another thrust washer
      underneath the impeller magnet, inside the housing. If this thrust washer is in good condition, you should observe a
      small gap between the bottom of the impeller and the end cap. If there is no gap, the thrust washer is worn and
      needs to be replaced (see Annual Maintenance for replacement procedure).

6.    Apply a light coat of O-ring lubricant (Parker Super O Lube) to the O-ring and mating surfaces. Reinstall the end
      cap in the housing, carefully aligning the end cap with the housing and pushing hard on the end cap to seat the first
      O-ring in the housing (only one O-ring should now be visible).




AN75 Revised 3/2024
7.   Reinstall the pump head on the end cap.
                                                               Note small gap
                                                               between impeller
                                                               and end cap.
                       Impeller –
                                                               Absence of gap
                       note salt
                                                               indicates worn
                       deposit
                                                               thrust washer
                                                               under impeller
                                                               magnet.


                                                                       Shaft


                                               Shaft,                 Impeller
                                               O-ring,
                                               and                               End cap
                       End cap                 thrust
                                               washer

                                     SBE 5M, 5P, or 5T with Pump Head Removed

Annual Maintenance
Note: The pump impeller replacement kit, PN 50391, includes the impeller,
O-rings, and thrust washers.
                                                                                     PN 31011
                                                                                     O-ring           PN 30571
                                   Caution                                                            O-ring
  Remove the end cap and impeller from the housing before cleaning the
impeller. The end cap O-rings seal the electronics chamber. The end cap may
“walk” out of the housing after the pump head is removed, allowing water to
    enter the electronics chamber if you clean the impeller without first
                   removing the end cap from the housing.

1.   Unscrew the pump head from the housing.                                                 End cap              Pump
                                                                                           and impeller           head
2.   Pull out the end cap from the housing.

3.   Replace the O-ring and two thrust washers on
     the shaft:
     A. Remove the O-ring from the shaft. A pair of                  End cap
                                                                                         PN 30009 (shown)
          tweezers works well for this.
                                                                                            or PN 234553
     B. Pull the impeller and attached magnet off the                         PN           impeller/magnet
          shaft. The thrust washer above the impeller will                   30010                             PN
          come off at the same time. Inspect the impeller                    thrust                          30010
                                                                            washer                                         PN
          for salt build-up, and clean if necessary. Inspect                                                  thrust
                                                                                                                          30095
          the magnet for wear. Particularly in sandy coastal                                                 washer
                                                                                                                          O-ring
          environments, the magnet may be worn down
          from abrasion. If necessary, replace the impeller /         Shaft
          magnet assembly (PN 30009 or 234553).
          Note: PN 30009 (with white impeller, as shown               SBE 5M, 5P, or 5T with Pump Head and Impeller Removed
          in photo) was replaced by PN 234553 (with
          black impeller) in 2012. These parts are interchangeable.
     C. Remove the second thrust washer from the bottom of the shaft. A pair of tweezers works well for this.
     D. Inspect the shaft for wear.
     E. Rinse the shaft and depression in the housing with clean, fresh water. Allow to dry.
     F. Using new thrust washers (2 of PN 30010) and O-ring (PN 30095), replace the thrust washer and impeller /
          magnet on the shaft. Replace the other thrust washer and O-ring on the shaft, above the impeller, pushing hard
          with your fingertip to seat the thrust washer and O-ring in place.

4.   Inspect the end cap O-rings and the mating surface on the pump head for dirt, nicks, and cuts. Clean or replace as
     necessary. Apply a light coat of O-ring lubricant (Parker Super O Lube) to the O-rings and mating surfaces.


AN75 Revised 3/2024
5.   Reinstall the end cap in the housing, carefully aligning the end cap with the housing and pushing hard on the end
     cap to seat the first O-ring in the housing (only one O-ring should now be visible).

6.   Reinstall the pump head on the end cap.

7.   Inspect the bulkhead connector for corrosion, which is a sign of seawater leakage between the bulkhead connector
     and cable. If there is corrosion, thoroughly clean the connector with water, followed by alcohol. Inspect the
     bulkhead connector for chips, cracks, or other flaws that may compromise the seal. Inspect the mating cable’s
     connector for cuts, nicks, breaks, or other problems that may compromise the seal. Give the connector surfaces a
     light coating of silicon grease, and remate the connector properly; see Application Note 57: Connector Care and
     Cable Installation.
     • If the bulkhead connector is severely corroded or damaged, it must be replaced. Sea-Bird Scientific
          recommends that this work be performed at the factory, because the pump’s physical configuration makes
          customer-replacement of the connector difficult.


Non-Functioning or Poorly Functioning Pump
Perform the inspection procedures listed above in Annual Maintenance. If you do not discover the problem there,
proceed as follows.

1.   Unscrew the pump head from the housing.

2.   Pull out the end cap from the housing.

3.   Pull out the electronics from the housing. Note that the electronics are wired to the bulkhead connector inside the
     housing.

4.   Verify that the magnet can spin freely and is not broken or damaged.

5.   Look for other signs of damage on the electronics.

6.   Reinstall the end cap in the housing:
     A. Apply a light coat of O-ring lubricant (Parker Super O Lube) to the O-ring and mating surfaces.
         SBE 5M – Gently place a new desiccant capsule (PN 31044 – 0.4 gram) on the electronics, and replace the
         black tape to secure it in place.
         SBE 5P or 5T - Gently place a new desiccant bag (PN 30558 – 1 gram) on the electronics.
         (see Application Note 71 for desiccant use and regeneration).
     B. Reinstall the electronics in the housing.
     C. Reinstall the end cap in the housing, carefully aligning the end cap with the housing and pushing hard on the
         end cap to seat the first O-ring in the housing (only one O-ring should now be visible).

7.   Reinstall the pump head on the end cap.




                        SBE 5M with Electronics Removed (titanium version shown; plastic version similar)




AN75 Revised 3/2024
                                                    SBE 5P with Electronics Removed (5T similar)



Previous Design: SBE 5T Titanium Pump with Retaining Ring
                                                       Caution
     Use only Super O-Lube, which is silicon-based. Do not use Parker O-Lube, which is petroleum based.

                                                        Caution
Be careful not to pinch the O-rings, which will allow water to enter the housing and damage the electronics.

In 2011, Sea-Bird changed the SBE 5T mechanical design; the current design is easily differentiated from the old
design because the current design does not have a retaining ring (see photos below). The old SBE 5T is opened from
the end with the retaining ring and bulkhead connector; the current SBE 5T is opened from the end with the pump
head. Instructions for disassembly/reassembly of the current SBE 5T pump are identical to those for the SBE 5P
pump.

Note: Impeller color may vary from what is shown in the photos.

Periodic Cleaning for SBE 5T
If you are going to store the pump for more than 1 week, or have removed the pump from a mooring, perform a more
thorough cleaning:

1.    Unscrew the pump head from the housing.

2.    Using clean, fresh water, thoroughly rinse the pump head and impeller.

3.    Inspect the impeller for salt deposits. Clean any deposits with clean, fresh water and a toothbrush. Verify that the
      impeller can turn freely.

4.    Inspect the shaft, and the O-ring and thrust washer holding the impeller on the shaft. There is another thrust washer
      underneath the impeller magnet, inside the housing. If this thrust washer is in good condition, you should observe a
      small gap between the bottom of the impeller and the end cap. If there is no gap, the thrust washer is worn and
      needs to be replaced (see Annual Maintenance for SBE 5T for replacement procedure).




AN75 Revised 3/2024
                                                              Note small gap                           End cap
                                                              between impeller                         O-ring
                                                              and end cap.
                       Impeller –
                                                              Absence of gap
                       note salt
                                                              indicates worn
                       deposit
                                                              thrust washer
                                                              under impeller
                                                              magnet.


                                                                      Shaft


           End cap                                                    Impeller

                                            Shaft, O-ring,
                                            and thrust                           End cap
                                            washer

                                        SBE 5T with Pump Head Removed



Annual Maintenance for SBE 5T

1.   Unscrew the pump head from                   PN 30571
     the housing.                                    O-ring        End cap
                                                                                           PN 30009 (shown)
2.   Replace the O-ring and two thrust                                                  or PN 234553
                                                                            PN
     washers on the shaft:                                                             impeller/magnet
                                                                          30010                             PN
     A. Remove the O-ring from the shaft.                                  thrust                          30010
                                                                          washer                                        PN
         A pair of tweezers works well for                                                                 thrust
                                                                                                                       30095
         this.                                                                                            washer
                                                                                                                       O-ring
     B. Pull the impeller and attached
         magnet off the shaft. The thrust
                                                                    Shaft
         washer above the impeller will
         come off at the same time. Inspect
                                                                    SBE 5T with Pump Head and Impeller Removed
         the impeller for salt build-up, and
         clean if necessary. Inspect the
         magnet for wear. Particularly in sandy coastal environments, the magnet may be worn down from abrasion. If
         necessary, replace the impeller / magnet assembly (PN 30009 or 234553).
         Note: PN 30009 (with white impeller, as shown in photo) was replaced by PN 234553 (with black impeller) in
         2012. These parts are interchangeable.
     C. Remove the second thrust washer from the bottom of the shaft. A pair of tweezers works well for this.
     D. Inspect the shaft for wear.
     E. Rinse the shaft and depression in the housing with clean, fresh water. Allow to dry.
     F. Using new thrust washers (2 of PN 30010) and O-ring (PN 30095), replace the thrust washer and impeller /
         magnet on the shaft. Replace the other thrust washer and O-ring on the shaft, above the impeller, pushing hard
         with your fingertip to seat the thrust washer and O-ring in place.

3.   Inspect the end cap O-ring and the mating surface on the pump head for dirt, nicks, and cuts. Clean or replace as
     necessary. Apply a light coat of Parker Super O Lube to the O-ring and mating surfaces.

4.   Reinstall the pump head on the pump housing.

5.   Inspect the bulkhead connector for corrosion, which is a sign of seawater leakage between the bulkhead connector
     and cable. If there is corrosion, thoroughly clean the connector with water, followed by alcohol. Inspect the
     bulkhead connector for chips, cracks, or other flaws that may compromise the seal. Inspect the mating cable’s
     connector for cuts, nicks, breaks, or other problems that may compromise the seal. Give the connector surfaces a
     light coating of silicon grease, and remate the connector properly; see Application Note 57: Connector Care and
     Cable Installation.
     • If the bulkhead connector is severely corroded or damaged, it must be replaced. Sea-Bird recommends that
          this work be performed at the factory, because the pump’s physical configuration makes customer-
          replacement of the connector difficult.

AN75 Revised 3/2024
Non-Functioning or Poorly Functioning SBE 5T
Perform the inspection procedures listed above in Annual Maintenance for SBE 5T . If you do not discover the problem
there, proceed as follows.
                                                                                              Connector
1.   Unscrew the connector end cap retaining ring. Install a 2-pin                            end cap         Retaining ring
     dummy plug with locking sleeve over the bulkhead
     connector to provide a good grip and protect the connector
     pins. Rotate the end cap back and forth while carefully
     pulling the end cap away from the housing. Pull out the end
     cap and attached electronics from the housing.

2.   Verify that the magnet can spin freely and is not broken or
     damaged.

3.   Look for other signs of damage on the electronics.

4.   Inspect the connector end cap O-ring and the mating surface in the housing for dirt, nicks, and cuts. Clean as
     necessary. If the O-ring or mating surface is damaged, return the pump to Sea-Bird for repairs.
     • Sea-Bird recommends that connector end cap O-ring replacement be performed at the factory, because the
         pump’s physical configuration makes customer-replacement of this O-ring difficult to perform without special
         tools.

5.   Apply a light coat of Parker Super O Lube lubricant to the O-ring and mating surfaces. Gently place a new
     desiccant bag (PN 30558 – 1 gram) on the electronics (see Application Note 71 for desiccant use and
     regeneration). Reinstall the electronics in the housing, until the O-ring has fully seated. Reinstall the retaining ring
     on the connector end cap.




                    Housing
                                                                                     PN 30082             Retaining ring
                                           Magnet                                    Connector end
                                                                      Desiccant      cap O-ring




AN75 Revised 3/2024
